[Music]
if your regular here on the bright side
you've probably noticed that I love
planes love them I used to love to jump
out of them all the time but that's
another story
still some things about airplanes still
seem outright confusing to me like why
on earth are airplane windows round
instead of square like the ones on your
house and why do the shades have to be
up when the planes take off and land all
right it's high time for some answers so
about those corner las' windows although
it's been around since the 1920s
commercial air travel didn't really take
off until the 50s
that's when airplane started to fly at
higher altitudes it saved Airlines tons
of money because up there the air is
significantly less dense and aircraft
use less fuel the only drawback of this
new development the plane cabin had to
be pressurized otherwise passengers
wouldn't be able to breathe at a height
of 30,000 feet and they don't pass out
and miss the in-flight entertainment
which back then was to jugglers and a
vaudeville comedian well maybe not that
last part the early box-shaped planes
couldn't handle that kind of pressure so
engineers presented a new cylinder
shaped cabin but even after this upgrade
aircraft still had standard square
windows and that turned out to be a
grave mistake several airplanes were
torn apart right in the air because of
it you see the pressure builds up
exactly in the corners making them
ultimate weak spots
if each square window has four
vulnerable spots it's likely to shatter
under the enormous stress that comes
with keeping the cabin pressurized for
passengers at high altitudes
luckily making airplane windows curved
solve this problem once and for all such
a shape distributes the pressure and
reduces the likelihood of cracks or any
other damage so you get to breathe easy
up there and look out the window without
having to worry about it giving way
under the pressure
okay sounds good but what about the
shades why am I always told to keep my
window shade up when the plane is taking
off or landing the Sun is blazing in my
eyes I'm just trying to sleep here well
turns out there are some serious safety
reasons behind this - when the shades
are closed
flight attendants can't see what's
happening outside and since most
accidents happen during takeoff and
landing
oh it's critical that the cabin crew
have a good view of what's going on
outside the aircraft then in case
something goes terribly wrong they can
react fast and evacuate passengers
besides opening the shades allow
passengers eyes to adjust so if they
have to get off the plane in a hurry
they won't feel binded by the ligh
revved up like a deuce another runner in
the night
remind me to explain those lyrics later
okay
finally I accept the fact that the
shades have to be open at particular
times during the flight
even when I'm grumpy and I'm trying to
get some shut-eye but must these windows
be so low why do I have to slouch when
I'm trying to admire the incredible view
out my window surprise surprise that's
also for safety reasons by placing
windows that low airplane manufacturers
distribute the pressure around them more
evenly check it out the floor of the
passenger cabin isn't actually the
bottom of the plane if the windows were
located any higher they'd be closer to
the top of the jet that in turn would
seriously mess with that oh so important
pressure distribution you just learned
about therefore aircraft windows are
located closer to the midline of the
fuselage even though they're pretty low
relative to the overall passenger cabin
height
got it but how about the size of the
windows kind of makes you feel like a
giant don't they why are they so small
well do you have any guesses yeah let's
just get into the safety stuff big
windows can weaken the plane's fuselage
if it's not as strong and gives under
pressure the aircraft gets ripped apart
not a good thing small windows prevent
that since the airframe remains sturdy
however there is another reason for
making aircraft windows bite-sized well
if you got big jaws let's say the
unthinkable happens and one of the
windows gets blown out at the cruising
altitude of 35,000 feet any person
sitting next to this window would
immediately be sucked out of the
aircraft and the lives of other
passengers would be in grave danger with
a gaping hole in this little bubble of
breathable air depressurization of the
cabin would ensue even with oxygen masks
passengers wouldn't last long in such
conditions that's why the pilots would
have to bring the plane down to at least
10,000 feet that would be enough for
everyone to breathe normally all of that
would be with these little itty bitty
windows if they were bigger that cabin
pressure would escape faster as a result
the air would become unbearable before
the aircraft managed to reach a safe
altitude so why are the windows in the
cockpit so big well in this case we have
to deal with priorities pilots need to
be able to see what's happening around
them and where they're going go that's
why plane manufacturers spent a fortune
on huge window panes designed with the
perfect shape material and thickness so
despite being panoramic cockpit
windshields can withstand incredible
pressure differences unlucky bird
accidents and other strains of fly until
recently it never occurred to me that
literally all commercial airliners have
doors on the left side there are several
reasons for that first of all the
captain typically sits on the left if
the door is on his side it's easier for
him to align the plane with the terminal
jet bridge also pilots need to be able
to judge the distance between the wing
and the terminal building so they can
park right
in front of the terminal doors finally
while the ground crew fuels the aircraft
on the right side passengers boarding on
the Left don't prevent them from doing
their work the same goes for baggage
loading and unloading another question
connected with the doors on jumbo jets
is why do they always open inward here's
a hint it's called a plug door that
means the door seals itself thanks to
the pressure difference on its two sides
as you know by now the pressure inside
the plane is much higher than it is
outside
this pressure literally forces the door
in its socket and prevents it from
opening until the pressure becomes equal
in other words instead of relying on the
doors lock which can let you down with
plug doors you take advantage of Boyle's
law which explains how pressure and
gases are related that's why it's
impossible for a person to open a
pressurize airplane door mid-flight each
square inch of this door feels the
pressure of six pounds of weight so to
open it you'd have to pull with the
force of a thousand pounds no human is
powerful enough to perform such a feat
of strength
well maybe the Hulk anyway the only way
to do it is to ask the pilot to
depressurize the cabin but why would you
want to go and do a thing like that
now I also recently found out that
backwards seating on a plane is much
safer than the usual one it's because
rear-facing seats provide more support
for your neck head and back but then why
don't our liners replace the existing
seats with their safer alternative well
first of all it's all about psychology
and tradition you'd probably feel
nothing short of confused if you entered
a passenger cabin and saw all the seats
facing the wrong way
don't you think but the main reason for
leaving things as they are is the huge
cost this renovation would involve with
a backward seat placement the passenger
center of gravity would be higher this
would take its toll on the seats with
more strain they'd have to be
strengthened along with the fittings and
the cabin floor in the end the
aircraft's weight would increase it
consume more fuel and airlines would
have to spend a lot more money and
probably slide their hand
deeper into your wallet rear-facing
seats do exist on some airplanes but you
have to pay more to book this kind for
example premium cabins on British
Airways Eddie hot or American Airlines
have the option of backward seating and
some people pick such seats for the
added privacy they provide and if you're
worried about getting motion sickness
from sitting backwards during a flight
no need to stress you can barely feel
the difference since it's nothing like
traveling in a rear-facing seat on a bus
or a train how about you what are the
questions about airplanes would you like
answers to leave them down in the
comments and I'll include them in my
next video if you learn something new
today
then give this video a like and share
with a friend but hey don't go leaving
my plane talk just yet we have over
2,000 cool videos for you to check out
all you have to do is pick this left or
right video click on it and enjoy and
remember stay on the bright side of life
[Music]